Eliminating communication credibility killers
There are two common mistakes that I've seen instantly undermine credibility and diminish influence. Eliminating them will boost your presence in your meetings. The first blunder is using softeners like I'm not sure if this is right, but this might be a silly idea. Sorry if this is going off track. It might seem polite or non-threatening, but it can appear as though you're unsure of yourself. This unintentionally diminishes the impact of your message before you've even said anything. I'm not sure about this, but do you think we could? Before we approve the analysis, let's double check that the data is correct. The second credibility killer is using just. I just wanted to share. I just like to add. I just have a quick question. Prefacing with just can project uncertainty and hesitation. Instead, use assertive statements. I want to say. I'd like to add. I have a question. Subtle change, powerful difference.


Speaking up when you can’t find your turn
Okay. Have you ever found yourself in a meeting eagerly anticipating your chance to contribute, only to realize that the opportunity never comes up? You never get your turn or never find the perfect moment. Instead of waiting politely for an invitation to speak, which, let's face it, doesn't usually happen. Seize your chance as soon as someone ends their point. Chime in with something like, great idea. That brings to mind another point and then continue without hesitation. Making a connection to what was previously just shared with what you have to say next is less jarring to the meeting's dynamics. Your colleagues will be more open to listen. Remember, there's rarely a perfect moment. So when inspiration strikes, find a cue, make the connection, and speak up.

Bookending to stay front of mind
According to the primacy and the recency effects from psychology, people tend to remember and place more importance on information shared at the beginning and the end of a session. So if you tend to be on the quiet side in meetings or you have little to contribute, you can give your voice a standing by being one of the first to speak and also one of the last start strong by sharing an intriguing idea, a fact relevant to the meeting's agenda, or a thought that emerged from your previous session. For example, kick off with, I stumbled across an interesting article that could really help us with item two on the agenda. As the meeting wraps up, take the opportunity to recap key points or emphasize a colleague's valuable suggestion. I'd like to spotlight Paul's innovative idea. It's worth exploring before our next meeting. Bookend your contribution to stay memorable.

Getting a supporter to make space for you
According to the primacy and the recency effects from psychology, people tend to remember and place more importance on information shared at the beginning and the end of a session. So if you tend to be on the quiet side in meetings or you have little to contribute, you can give your voice a standing by being one of the first to speak and also one of the last start strong by sharing an intriguing idea, a fact relevant to the meeting's agenda, or a thought that emerged from your previous session. For example, kick off with, I stumbled across an interesting article that could really help us with item two on the agenda. As the meeting wraps up, take the opportunity to recap key points or emphasize a colleague's valuable suggestion. I'd like to spotlight Paul's innovative idea. It's worth exploring before our next meeting. Bookend your contribution to stay memorable.

Avoiding self-censorship to be heard

If you ever hold yourself back from speaking up in meetings, you're far from alone. You might self-censor out of fear of embarrassment, avoiding being judged or doubting the worthiness of your ideas. Or you might be an introvert. Studies reveal that those who actively participate in meetings are perceived as more confident, competent and helpful to others. So staying silent could be holding back your career. Here are two simple tips to help you speak up. Remind yourself of why you were invited to attend. Maybe it's because of your expertise, unique insights, or you're an integral part of the team. Prepare, prepare, prepare. Before the meeting, review the agenda, and identify valuable contributions or questions to support the meeting's intended outcomes. At the start, you could share I've reviewed the agenda and I'm looking forward to discussing topic. I also wanted to mention point, which I think is important to consider. This gives you speaking momentum and makes it less daunting for you to actually speak up.

Contributing value with strategic questioning

As Einstein once said, don't listen to the person who has all the answers, listen to the person who has the questions. You don't always need to have groundbreaking ideas to contribute in a meeting. You can still be a valuable contributor by asking timely and strategic questions. Here are a couple of ways. Stimulate critical thinking. When you notice that an idea or a conclusion hasn't been stress tested, ask open ended questions that challenge assumptions to evaluate potential consequences. What assumptions are we making and are they valid? What are the alternatives and how do they compare? What evidence do we have to support this and is it reliable? Shift attention back to the meeting's outcomes. If you notice the conversation is going in circles or drifting off tangent, ask questions that steer the meeting back on track. In the interest of time, are we addressing the most important objectives? What decision should we make to achieve the outcome for this agenda item? Asking strategic questions establishes you as a valuable critical thinker and problem solver.

Getting strategic with your timing

Let's say everyone in a meeting is flustered after a contentious issue was just debated. To lift the mood, you decide to share Hey, I found the perfect venue for our team offsite at half the allocated budget. Expecting an enthusiastic response, you get crickets. A common frustration people share is their suggestions and ideas are frequently overlooked or disregarded in meetings, and this could be due to failure to read the room and poor timing. Mastering good timing in meetings requires you to read the room. Here's how. Observe body language. How others in the meeting leaning in with interest and actively engaging in the conversation. Or are they sitting back with their arms crossed indicating disinterest or disagreement? Assess the mood. Take the emotional pulse of the meeting. Is it enthusiastic and collaborative or does it seem tense? If you feel the group is open to new ideas, go ahead and share. Otherwise, wait until the energy lifts.

Framing ideas to engage meeting attendees

One of the biggest mistakes I've seen in meetings is when people blurt out ideas without framing them. This could leave the group wondering, what are you getting at? Get to the point. Continuing to repeat this mistake can permanently undermine your credibility. But if you were to start by framing what you're about to say and with a compelling why, you're priming your audience to listen. For example, I know there's been a slump in engagement at all our branches, so I've compiled three strategies to share with you based on what worked for some of our competitors. The first is the group now knows what to expect. You create anticipation and they'll be primed to hear all of your points. They'll also be less inclined to interject until you've finished. Then make sure you sum up and prompt the discussion. So those are the three strategies to inspire us. Now I'd love your input on if and how we could implement some of them. Remember, tell them what you're going to tell them and why.


Claiming back credit for overlooked suggestions

So you're in a meeting and you make a suggestion, but no one seems to notice. Five minutes later, someone else in the room shares the suggestion and the group loves it. Whatever the reason, it happens more times than I'd like to see. It's not always fitting to speak up, but when it's a valued contribution, being recognized is only fair, and getting credit can impact your perceived value. Here are a couple of ways to highlight the elephant in the room without coming across as petty or confrontational. Build on the idea. Take the opportunity to further develop or expand on the idea. Selma, it's great to see that you're aligned with what I shared earlier. To build on that, we could also consider. Be curious. If comfortable, you might say one good suggestion. It seems you're aligned with what I shared earlier. What was your thought process? You can also use the same approach to speak up for others if their suggestions are overlooked.


Making your introduction work for you

When you're in a meeting with unfamiliar people, it's common to be asked to introduce yourself. Seize the opportunity to make a positive and credible impression. Rather than a simple introduction like, Hi, I'm Yuri, Business Analyst from IT. Showcase your value and enthusiasm. For example, Hi, I'm Yuri, Business analyst for IT. Thanks for inviting me to join the meeting. I'm really looking forward to listening to your ideas for the project and sharing a technical perspective to help make it a success. You can remember this simple formula. Name and title, express thanks, show enthusiasm and how you add value. A well-crafted introduction can leave a lasting impression, positioning you as a proactive, resourceful and engaged team member.